In our last lesson,
we discussed gold standards against which to evaluate the performance of our algorithms.
This is very important for the FDA
because typically you want to be able to say that your tool
really has been compared to
the best available tools so that you can say it's adding value.
If it's not better than the gold standard,
big improvements to other aspects can be defended as
making the algorithm better than the existing.
Recall from Lesson 3,
we talked a lot about training
your algorithm and then validating it with a health outset.
It's common to create algorithms from data that exists publicly,
which is what you'll actually be doing in your final project.
For the final step in submitting to the FDA though,
you'll need to perform a standalone clinical assessment of
your tool that uses an FDA validation set from a real-world
setting to prove to the FDA that your algorithm works on
data that looks more similar to what you'd see coming directly from a hospital.
You can think of this dataset as production data that
your algorithm is trying to perform it based on just once,
now that it's been fully produced.
You will run this production through your algorithm only one time after you
fully build the software around it and feel that it has its best performance.
These validation plans also sometimes involve
deploying your algorithm in a real clinical setting and
assessing its performance in real time while it runs in
the background of clinicians performing their regular workflows.
This may be especially important if you're claiming that your algorithm saves time.
For instance, if you are demonstrating that your algorithm can read the same number of
scans as a radiologist in half the time with a similar level of accuracy,
you'd probably want to show that in a real clinical workflow.
You'll need to identify a clinical partner who you can work with to
gather this FDA validation set for your validation plan.
This partner will collect data from a real-world clinical setting that you
describe so that you can see how your algorithm performs under these specifications.
First, you'll want to describe who you want the data from.
For example, if your algorithm is only intended and indicated for
women between the ages of 20-80 with no prior history of breast cancer,
then you would ask your clinical partner for data from patients who fit this demographic.
You'll also want to specify what types of images you're looking for.
If your algorithm is only intended to be used on screening mammography studies,
which have a different imaging protocol than other types of mammography studies,
then specify this for your data collection as well.
Next, you will need to choose a way that you create
the ground truth of all of the clinical data that your partner provided you with.
The choice of your ground truth ties back once again to your intended use statement.
Let's look at an algorithm that detects masses on mammography screens.
If your claim is that your device is intended to determine if a mass is malignant,
you will need a biopsy to create the ground truth.
But if you are making something that's
card xed to help identify suspicious findings on imaging,
the gold standard for that clinically would just be a radiologist read.
Since you're not creating something that's replacing
the radiologist or intended to be better than the radiologist,
this is a fine ground truth.
So you can make a case to the FDA that a perfectly reasonable ground truth
is a radiologist labels and that you're going to
compare your algorithm performance to these.
Even stronger ground truth,
if you have the time and money for it,
would be to create that silver standard that we discussed
back in Lesson 3 using multiple radiologists.
For your validation plan,
you want to tell the FDA what a good score is
for your algorithm and have evidence to support your reasoning.
As a result, we need a performance standard.
This is a great opportunity to leverage the literature.
While you could conduct your own study to see how accurate a bunch of radiologists are,
you should first see if it's reported somewhere in
the literature as this will be a lot easier.
You will come across a bunch of studies that you can
use to gather radiologist performance statistics.
Let's say that after reading through a bunch of papers,
you find that there is a range of F1 scores and decide that
your algorithm should have at least an F1 score that is the average from these studies.
You can use this as evidence of good performance on a device for the FDA.
Depending on the use case for your algorithm,
part of your validation plan may need to
include assessing how fast your algorithm can read a study.
This becomes a little more complex,
but I wanted to touch on it just for completeness.
Let's say part of your algorithm's indications for use,
say that it could be used in an emergency setting,
like the example we've been using about brain bleeds in workflow prioritization.
You'll want to demonstrate how fast your algorithm can read an image.
Again, I don't want to dive too deep into this,
but you may need to show that your algorithm can do this in
an actual clinical setting to prove not only that it can run fast,
but it can run fast on a hospital's actual infrastructure.
If your algorithm depends on such software to actually return a timely answer,
then this would fall into your algorithmic limitations as
well as indications for use sections that we talked about earlier.
You also may need a third party to verify that your algorithm returned
accurate results in the specified amount of time if this is part of your labeling.
Let's recap and put everything together that we
just learned about a validation plan for the FDA.
First, you'll need to define
an FDA validation dataset that you can
obtain from your clinical partner to test your algorithm.
Next, you'll need to gather ground truth labels
likely from a radiologist or a group of radiologists.
Next, you'll need to define a performance standard for
your algorithm that you can use backing up with literature references.
Finally, run your algorithm on the data to prove that it meets
the performance standard and you'll be all set to submit to the FDA.
Hopefully, your device or algorithm will be
approved and ready for use to make some impact.